ARC-0019: NFT ASA URL templating proposal for mutable IPFS CID replacement in URLs. (#63)
algorandfoundation/ARCs: ARCs/arc-draft_asa_url_templating.md

Algorand ASAs support mutation on-chain of a few parameters - the Manager, Clawback, Freeze, and Reserve addresses [unless previously cleared].  These are changed via an asset-config transaction.  An asset-config transaction may include a note, but it is limited to 1KB and accessing this value requires clients to use an indexer to iterate/retrieve the values.

Of the changeable properties, the Reserve address is somewhat distinct in that it is not used for anything directly on-chain.  It is used solely for determining what is in/out of circulation (by subtracting supply from that held by the reserve address).  With an NFT, the Reserve address is irrelevant as it is a 1 of 1 unit.  Thus, the Reserve address is usable as a 32-byte 'bitbucket'.

These 32-bytes can thus be repurposed as efficient storage for a SHA2-256 hash uniquely referencing the desired content for the ASA (ARC3-like metadata for example)

> Using the reserve address in this way means that what an ASA 'points to' for metadata can be changed with a single asset config transaction, changing only the 32-bytes of the reserve address, and being able to reference any size of content in IPFS.  The new data is also accessible via even non-archival nodes with a single call to /v2/assets/xxx API to fetch the ASA data that, for something wanting to fetch/display NFTS much be fetched anyway.  No expensive or slow indexer calls are required.  Asset fetches are always near instant as all nodes maintain current state of the asset definition. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the reserve address in this way means that what an ASA 'points to' for metadata can be changed with a single asset config transaction, changing only the 32-bytes of the reserve address.  The new value is accessible via even non-archival nodes with a single call to the `/v2/assets/xxx` REST endpoint.  
```

## Specification

> An indication that this ARC is in use is defined by an ASA URL's "scheme" having the prefix "template-".   This proposal is putting forth a simple solution for a specific problem, namely mutability for IPFS hosted content-ids.  The intention is that FUTURE ARCs could define additional template substitutions, but this is not meant to be a kitchen sink of templates, only to establish a possible baseline of syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal specifies a method to provide mutability for IPFS hosted content-ids.  The intention is that FUTURE ARCs could define additional template substitutions, but this is not meant to be a kitchen sink of templates, only to establish a possible baseline of syntax. 

An indication that this ARC is in use is defined by an ASA URL's "scheme" having the prefix "template-".  
```

An Asset meeting this specification **MUST** have:

1. **URL Scheme of "template-ipfs"**

```template-ipfs://(...)```

> The ifps:// scheme is already somewhat of a meta scheme in that clients interpret the ipfs scheme as referencing an IPFS CID (version 0/base58 or 1/base32 currently) followed by optional path within certain types of IPFS DAG content (IPLD CAR content for example).  The clients take the CID and use to fetch directly from the IPFS network directly via IFPS nodes, or via various IPFS gateways (https://ipfs.io/ipfs/CID[/...], pinata, etc.)).  

Reviewer: make this non-normative with `>` and link to where its specified

2. **An "ipfscid" _template_ argument in place of the normal CID.**

Where the format of templates are {*template type* [':' delimited parameters...])

The ipfscid template definitions is based on properties within the IPFS CID spec: https://github.com/multiformats/cid  
```	ipfscid:{version}:{multicodec content-type name}:[field name containing 32-byte digest, ie reserve]:{hash type}```

> The intent is to recompose a complete CID based on the content-hash contained within the 32-byte reserve address, but using the correct multicodec content type, ipfs content-id version, and hash type to match how the asset creator will seed the IPFS content.  If a single file is added using the 'ipfs' CLI via 'ipfs add --cid-version=1 metadata.json' then the resulting content will be encoded using the 'raw' multicodec type.  If a directory is added containing one or more files, then it will be encoded using the dag-pb multicodec.  CAR content will also be dag-pb.  Thus based on the method used to post content to IPFS, the ipfscid template should match. 

Reviewer: more non-normative

		return "", ErrUnsupportedField
	}
	var (
		codec         multicodec.Code
		multihashType uint64
		hash          []byte
		err           error
		cidResult     cid.Cid
	)
	if err = codec.Set(matches[templateIPFSRegexp.SubexpIndex("codec")]); err != nil {
		return "", ErrUnsupportedCodec
	}
	multihashType = multihash.Names[matches[templateIPFSRegexp.SubexpIndex("hash")]]
	if multihashType == 0 {
		return "", ErrUnsupportedHash
	}

	hash, err = multihash.Encode(reserveAddress[:], multihashType)
	if err != nil {
		return "", ErrHashEncoding
	}
	if matches[templateIPFSRegexp.SubexpIndex("version")] == "0" {
		if codec != multicodec.DagPb {
			return "", ErrInvalidV0
		}
		if multihashType != multihash.SHA2_256 {
			return "", ErrInvalidV0
		}
		cidResult = cid.NewCidV0(hash)
	} else {
		cidResult = cid.NewCidV1(uint64(codec), hash)
	}
	return fmt.Sprintf("ipfs://%s", strings.ReplaceAll(asaUrl, matches[0], cidResult.String())), nil
}
```

#### Typescript Implementation

A modified version of a simple ARC3 viewer can be found at https://github.com/TxnLab/arc3.xyz specifically the code segment at https://github.com/TxnLab/arc3.xyz/blob/main/src/lib/nft.ts#L41

> This is a fork of https://github.com/barnjamin/arc3.xyz

Reviewer: nnooiccee

https://algoexplorer.io/asset/560421434  
With IPFS URL: ```ipfs://QmQZyq4b89RfaUw8GESPd2re4hJqB8bnm4kVHNtyQrHnnK```

The Testnet ASA was minted with the URL: ```template-ipfs://{ipfscid:0:dag-pb:reserve:sha2-256}``` as this CID is a V0 / dag-pb CID.

A helpful link to 'visualize' CIDs and for this specific id, is: https://cid.ipfs.io/#QmQZyq4b89RfaUw8GESPd2re4hJqB8bnm4kVHNtyQrHnnK

Using the using the example encoding implementation, results in virtual 'reserve address' of **EEQYWGGBHRDAMTEVDPVOSDVX3HJQIG6K6IVNR3RXHYOHV64ZWAEISS4CTI**

As can be seen here: https://testnet.algoexplorer.io/asset/66753108

Using the forked https://github.com/TxnLab/arc3.xyz repo, with testnet selected, and the /nft/66753108 url - the browser will display the original content as-is, using only the Reserve address as the source of the content hash.

## Rationale
The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages.

## Backwards Compatibility

> The 'template-' prefix of the scheme is intended to break clients reading these ASA URLS outright.  Clients interpreting these URLS as-is would likely yield unusual errors.  Code checking for an explicit 'ipfs' scheme for example will not see this as compatible with any of the default processing and SHOULD treat the URL as if it were simply unknown/empty.

Reviewer 2: URLS -> URLs

## Reference Implementation

### Encoding
#### Go[lang] implementation

```go
import (
    "github.com/algorand/go-algorand-sdk/types"

> 	"github.com/ipfs/go-cid"

Reviewer 3: minor: indentation issue

	"github.com/multiformats/go-multihash"
)
// ...
func ReserveAddressFromCID(cidToEncode cid.Cid) (string, error) {
    decodedMultiHash, err := multihash.Decode(cidToEncode.Hash())
    if err != nil {
        return "", fmt.Errorf("failed to decode ipfs cid: %w", err))
    }

>     return types.EncodeAddress(decodedMultiHash.Digest)

Reviewer 2: I'm slightly concerned that the 4-byte checksum added would cause confusion for decoding but I guess it's okay if it's used in an address field like `reserve`. I wonder how the encoding would be handled for the note field though.

Author: > You probably have a specific use case for this proposed ARC but I think ipns also has its place for mutable NFTs. Curious why ipns is entirely left out of the conversation for NFT mutability. Haven't seen it in any ARCs so far or maybe I've missed it....

Correct.  I looked at IPNS originally and intended to use it, but talking w/ IPFS devs, it's not really meant for large-scale use and has many problems, particularly with scale.  The key is effectively fixed to a particular clusters key and if referencing, for example, millions of 'files' off that single mutable ipns root then any change to any file requires a republishing of the entire root dag node and republishing the 'single' ipns resolution link.  
So, providing distinct, independent mutable content isn't appropriate for single ipns resolution, and on top of that, resolving ipns is extremely slow (as they admit).

Author: > I'm slightly concerned that the 4-byte checksum added would cause confusion for decoding but I guess it's okay if it's used in an address field like `reserve`. I wonder how the encoding would be handled for the note field though.

Oh, are you referring to the Algorand's 'display' of an Algorand Address based off the raw 32-byte public key where it adds a checksum and uses that for the 58 byte base32 'public account address?'  
Correct, it's completely ignored (and is within algorand as well - other than as input 'validation').  The SDK will handle going back and forth and as long as developers use the base 32-bytes of the PK it should work fine.

Author: ..continuing w/ IPNS point (going off the confused emoji response).
If you had an ASA URL of ipns://xxxxxxxx/somename.json yet you had millions of 'somename' (I will in my case at least) then you basically have a single IPFS DAG at root (imagine a single directory with a million files) with nodes for every file off it.  To add/change any file within that virtual directory - the hash of the node changing changes, as well as the creation of new root node (referencing ALL the children) and its new hash.  That single new 'root' hash has to then be published as "the" new IPNS hash to represent that ipns:// >- xxxx <-- link.  
It's 'ok' if you're doing for single root level changes but since the base ipns key that you're providing a replacement for is explicitly part of the configuration of the ipfs node itself, you really can't manage millions of those base entries like you'd want per ASA.

Reviewer 2: I am annoyed to hear that ipns doesn't scale and is slow. 😤 Your proposal looks like a decent solution to this problem and I might use it at some point as ipns wouldn't suit my use case with what you have described. For now, without testing the implementation, I don't have any further comments.
